# TTL

## Status

`draft`

## Context

How to build a more performant TTL mechanism for local cache?

Maintaining a set of keys that could expire is challenging, because we need to keep pooling periodically to check if there are keys that expired.


## Decision

Break the operation into time window.

### Array of expiry duration

When adding a new key with ttl, add the ttl to array of expiry duration. Since this array will only contain increasing time (assuming the TTL is constant too), we can also check the last item to see if the same expiry duration already exists.

If the time is less than the last time, dont need to append.

### Batch expiry

Before appending the deadline, round it up to the nearest nth, where nth can be 5s or 10s.

This will group the keys according to time window, and expire them at the same time 


### Lazy vacuum

Instead of running a background job that will execute in the background, we can trigger it lazily when setting the TTL key instead.

This reduces the need to coordinate cleanup.

Check if the first time is before now, if yes, perform a cleanup.

If we are running it as a background job, we can shift the first item in the slice, then sleep until the next deadline to execute.

## Decisions 

### Enqueue deadlines

To run the cleanup at minimal wait instead of every interval, we can enqueue the deadlines in an ascending list.

```
deadlines = [5s, 15s, 20s, 1h]
```

To optimise the duration, we can round them to a time window. E.g. rounding up to the next seconds will batch the deadlines to a window. 


A background worker can pick the item from the list and wait for the specified duration before executing the cleanup function.

```
next = deadlines.shift()
sleep(next)
```


### Tracking states

For tracking states of the deadline, we use two datastructure. A map is used to keep count of the number of expiring keys within the window.

Then a list is used to store the deadlines in ascending order.

Whenever the threshold is exceeded or if the deadline is exceeded, then the task will be executed.

```
def add(deadline):
  nextWindow = roundToNextWindow(deadline)
  count =  incrementWindowCounter(nextWindow)
  if count > threshold
    run()
  addToDeadlines(nextWindow)
```

### Passive Cleanup

Instead of running the cleanup at every interval, we can check if there are keys to cleanup when a new deadline is added. However, if the add method is not called, then the values remain in memory.

### Active Cleanup

We can actively run the cleanup at every interval. Determining the interval is the trickiest part.

We can ensure the cleanup will execute whenever there are keys added, and the cleanup should happen at the earliest interval.

If subsequent keys are added and they expired earlier, then the currently pending cleanup will be stopped and a new one will be started at an earlier interval. 
